README
***
=========
precursor 69c
changes - this is a temporary version modified to try and make the non-sim operation agree with 68h. This came about when I tried to run Stuarts input file from the QSO part of the site. It gave totally different results for the temperature distribution. Took a while to make them agree, but the problem appeared to be in a few places.
atomic.h
reset PI to its original value, no difference, reset density_min to 1e-20. Not much difference, but it clearly does change the densities of ions, and I wanted to try for precise agreement. This can be safely changed back in the next version.
ionization.c
put the temperature solver back to the original code. This needs testing to see if it really makes a difference. It certainly didn't fix the problem when it was first changed back, but only because there were other more serious problems. It will certainly change the detailed temperature structure.
photon1d.c
deleted lots of printf lines
python.c
deleted lots of printf lines
resonate.c
deleted lots of printf lines including some bracketed by if statements designed to print out track of a particular photon. This changes seemed to be the most important.
saha.c
Odd one this, in picking thruogh the coe, I noticed that option 3 is incorrect, and concentrations is called with mode3, rather than mode0 is it was in python68. Fixed. This may make the long and knigge figure generated by balance agree once more.
Also put back the original big statmenets and put the first ion density to 1. rather than 1e-100. These should not make any difference in the broad scale of things, but it does slightly change the results since we end up with small quantities of other ions.
trans_phot.c
more printf lines deleted
wind2d.c
yet more printf lines deleted
finally removed the commented out lines which initially set up the wind with a sim correcion. We decided a while back to set it to saha


